\input texinfo	
@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename latex2rtf.info
@settitle LaTeX2rtf
@setchapternewpage odd
@tex
\def\LaTeX{L\kern-.36em\raise.3ex\hbox{\textsc{a}}\kern-.15em\TeX}
\def\LaTeXe{\LaTeX\kern.15em 2\boldmath${}_{\textstyle\varepsilon}$}
@end tex
@c %**end of header

@macro latex {}
@iftex
LaTeX{}
@end iftex
@ifnottex
LaTeX
@end ifnottex
@end macro

@macro latexe {}
@iftex
LaTeXe{}
@end iftex
@ifnottex
LaTeX2e
@end ifnottex
@end macro

@macro l2r {}
@iftex
LaTeX{}2RTF
@end iftex
@ifnottex
LaTeX2RTF
@end ifnottex
@end macro

@ifinfo
This file documents @l2r{}, a converter from the @latex{} markup language
for document typesetting into rtf, which does the same thing, but in
another way and mood.

Copyright 1998-2001 Georg Lehner minor updates by Wilfried Hennings and
Scott Prahl

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print
the results, provided the printed document carries a copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying,
provided also that the sections entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General
Public License'' are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation.

@end ifinfo

@titlepage 
@title @l2r{}
@subtitle 
A converter from @latex{} to RTF

Edition 0.2
@author Georg Lehner,
minor changes by Wilfried Hennings and Scott Prahl

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1998-2001 Georg Lehner, Wilfried Hennings, Scott Prahl

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
sections entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License'' are
included exactly as in the original, and provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top, History, (dir), (dir)
@top @l2r{}

This file documents @l2r{}, a converter from the @latex{} markup
language for document typesetting into rtf, which does the same thing,
but in another way and mood.

@c This document applies to version 1.9j of latex2rf

@end ifnottex

@menu
* History::                     
* Introduction::                
* Availability::                
* Invoking LaTeX2RTF::          
* Features::                    
* Configuring LaTeX2RTF ::      
* Error Messages and Logging of LaTeX2RTF Activity ::  
* LaTeX2RTF under Development ::  
* Index of Commandline and Configuration file Options ::  
@end menu

@node  History, Introduction, Top, Top
@chapter History & Copyright
@cindex History of the programm
@cindex Copyright issues

In 1994 the first Version of @l2r{} was written by a group of students of
the Viena University supervised by Ralf Schlatterbeck. They created a simple
@latex{} parser and added most of the infrastructure for the program. This
was version 1.0 of @l2r{}.  In 1995, work on @l2r{} was
continued with a second group of students. The result was @l2r{} version
1.5.

In 1998 @email{jorge_lehner@@gmx.net,Georg Lehner} found the reference to @l2r{} on
the @uref{http://www.fz-juelich.de/isr/1/texconv.htm, TeX Conversion Webpage}  of
@email{W.Hennings@@fz-juelich.de,Wilfried Hennings} and added some functionality and took
over the maintainence of the program. Wilfried Hennings actually coordinates
the development of the program and maintains the project on 
@uref{http://sourceforge.net/projects/latex2rtf/,SourceForge} where there are also
mailing lists for users
@email{latex2rtf-users@@lists.sourceforge.net}
and developers
@email{latex2rtf-developers@@lists.sourceforge.net}.
For subscription to these lists:
@email{mail_to_latex2rtf-users-request@@lists.sourceforge.net?subject=subscribe}
or
@email{mail_to_latex2rtf-developers-request@@lists.sourceforge.net?subject=subscribe}

As of October 2001, version 1.9k of @l2r{} is available. 
Afterwards there shall be a jump to Version 2.0 with a complete redesign, but
this is not history but future ...

The contents of this manual is composed by copying shamelessly what was
available in the original sources and documentation.


@node Introduction, Availability, History, Top
@chapter  Introduction

@l2r{} is a translator program from @latex{} text into ``rich text format''
files.  These files are commonly referred to  as RTF files and are published
standard format by Microsoft.  This standard is somewhat ambiguous in places
and Microsoft ignores various parts of the standard that are inconvenient, but
RTF widely used by many WYSIWIG text editors and is supported by
Microsoft Word and Word for Windows. RTF can be exported and/or
imported by several textprocessors.

@l2r{} translates the text and much of the formatting information from @latex{}
to RTF, but the typeset output is not nearly as good as what you would get from
using @latex{} directly.  So, why bother translating? There are three purposes:

@enumerate
@item
      You use @latex{} and hate everything beginning with MS-@enddots{} But you have to
      share your documents to people which don't even now that there exist other
      things than MS-@enddots{}
      
@item
      You know somebody who frequently sends you very fine @latex{} documents. 
      Unfortunately, you are ``on the other side'' and need to import her files, 
      steal some part and then desktop publish it in your fine MS-@dots{} environment.
      
@item
      You maybe have both things, @latex{} and MS-@dots{}, or you don't. But you like
      the way how @latex{} and friends work, and you don't want to type in a
      letter to your friends with about 345 characters and end up with a @file{.doc}
      file of 32,845 byte. So you edit your documents either with @file{edit.com} or
      @file{edlin} in the structured form that @latex{} encourages, and then you use
      MS-@dots{}, or MS-@dots{}-Viewer or any other RTF-rendering software to print out
      your file.  Yes, this somewhat bizarre, but we are all somewhat bizarre, are
      we not?
      
@end enumerate

There are drawbacks to the conversion process. In fact, don't expect any
@latex{} file to be converted like you want, don't expect it to be converted
without errors or warnings, and don't be especially surprised if it doesn't
convert at all.  @l2r{} is known to have many bugs and many missing features.
The number seems to grow more and more each day.  Nevertheless, we can categorically
state that there are some special cases,  in which a @latex{} file will be translated
to RTF satisfactorily by @l2r{} --- This was sort of disclaimer, ok? Ok!

@latex{} is a system for typesetting text and therefore it focuses on the logical
structure of a document, whilst RTF is meant to be a transport format for a
family of Desktop Publishing Software, dealing mostly with the design of a
text.

Although the possible different commands and styles in @latex{} are much more
flexible and standardized than in RTF, only a small subset of commands has been
implemented to date.  @xref{Unimplemented Features}.

Some of the capabilities of @l2r{} are restricted in scope 
or buggy.  @xref{Known Bugs}.

RTF is a moving target, i.e., Microsoft does not stop inventing new
extensions and features for it. So you cannot view newer RTF files with older
word Processors.  @l2r{} eventually will generate RTF output that is
unreadable with your Program.  The syntax and semantics of RTF are 
somewhat artistic, i.e., you can generate a
syntactically correct RTF file that cannot be displayed by some/most word
processors.

For more details on RTF look at the RTF-Tools by Paul DuBois, and the
corresponding newsgroups, etc. @uref{http://www.primate.wisc.edu/}

@node Availability, Invoking LaTeX2RTF, Introduction, Top
@chapter Availability

@l2r{} is available for many Unix Platforms, for the Macintosh, and for MS-DOS, 
including all versions of MS Windows 95.

The MS-DOS version (1.8aa and up) will also run under all MS Windows versions.
It requires an i386 processor or better.
The Win32 Version requires @uref{http://sources.redhat.com/cygwin/,Cygnus-Cygwin32}. 
As the MS-DOS version (1.8aa and up) will also run under all MS
windows versions, the Win32 version has been discontinued.

You find the latest version on @uref{http://sourceforge.net/projects/latex2rtf/,SourceForge}
and -- with some delay -- on CTAN sites: e.g., @uref{http://www.dante.de} or
@uref{http://www.ctan.org}.

There are a couple of persons working on the @l2r{}-revival, coordinated by
@email{W.Hennings@@fz-juelich.de, Wilfried Hennings}.
Contact the mailing_list for the latest news.

@node Invoking LaTeX2RTF, Features, Availability, Top
@chapter Invoking LaTeX2RTF

The @l2r{} command converts a @latex{} file into RTF text format. The text and
much of the formatting information is translated to RTF making the new file
look similar to the original.  The command line syntax is:

@example
latex2rtf [-options] inputfile.[tex]
@end example

The @code{-options} may consist of one or more of the following

@table @code
@item -a auxfile
specify an @file{.aux} file (for table and figure references) that differs from
@file{inputfile.aux}. If this is
omitted, the name of the inputfile with the suffix replaced `.aux' will be
taken.

@item -V 
prints version information on standard output and exits.

@item -C codepage
used to specify the character set (code page) used in the @latex{} document. 
This is only important when non-ansi characters are included in the @latex{}
document.
Typically this is done in a @latexe{} file by using
@example
\usepackage[codepage]@{inputenc@}
@end example
This command is not needed if the above command is already in the @latexe{}
file.  You may select any of the following code pages:
ansinew, applemac, cp437, cp437de, cp850, cp852, cp865, decmulti, cp1250, 
cp1252, latin1, latin2, latin3, latin4, latin5, latin9, and next.  Support
for the Eastern European codepages is pretty weak at the moment.  The default
behavior is to use ansinew (code page 1252).

@item -l language
used to set the language used by the @latex{} document.  Typically, this is 
specified in a @latexe{} document by including
@example
\usepackage[language]@{babel@}
@end example
where @code{language} is one of the languages supported by the @code{babel}
package.   THis All languages listed in the
babel system are supported so far as translations for ``Chapter,'' ``References,''
and the like.  Specific support for specific options of the german style
package are explictly supported.  The french translated names are found in the
@file{french.cfg} file in the @file{cfg/} directory.

@item -d
The `-d' option determines the amount of debugging information to send to
stderr while translating. `0' means only Errors, `1' Warning Messages
(default) also.  These numbers can go as high as `7'.
@end table

Unless an outputfile is specified with the `-o' option, the resulting RTF is
produced on standard output.



The `.aux'-file is needed for cross-references and citations. You have to
provide both, the `.tex'- and the `.aux'-file to be able to convert @latex{}-files
with this features.

You can specify a bblfile (for citations) with the `-b' option. If this is
omitted, the name of the inputfile with the suffix replaced by `.bbl' will be
taken.

If inputfile is not specified, standard input is read.

User defined @latex{} commands are ignored. If you are familiar with the RTF
format and the commands can be translated by simply inserting a format string
into the RTF file you can add these commands to the @file{direct.cfg} configuration
file.  @xref{Direct Conversion Configuration}.

To correctly convert font names you must edit the @file{fonts.cfg} configuration file.

You have to specify the font names you use and how the @latex{} default font names
should be converted to RTF.  @xref{Font Configuration}.
@latex{} variables and user defined commands are not evaluated. They will be
simply ignored. To let @l2r{} know the names of variables you can add them
in the @file{ignore.cfg} file.  @xref{Ignore Command Configuration}.

The language dependent sectioning names can be redefined to meet the idiom of
the @latex{} document.  @xref{Language Configuration}.

The environment variable RTFPATH may contain a search path for the support
files (all files ending in @file{.cfg}). If no file is found during the search in the
search-path or if the environment variable is not set, the compiled-in default
for the configuration-file directory is used. If the files are not found at all
the program aborts.

In the MS-DOS version the search path is separated by `;' in the Unix version
by `:'. For the paths themselves apply `\' and `/'. A separator may appear at
the beginning or ending of RTFPATH.

CAUTION: Please make sure that the input file is a correct @latex{} file. Use
@latex{} to find and correct errors before using @l2r{}. The conversion command
does not properly handle all errors caused by corrupt input files.

Make sure that the configuration files are in the correct directory. @l2r{}
will need at least @file{fonts.cfg}, @file{direct.cfg}, @file{ignore.cfg}, @file{english.cfg}.
You may have to change one ore more of them to suit your needs.
@xref{Configuring LaTeX2RTF}.

@xref{Missing and faulty command line options}, for actual implementations
irregularities.

See See section Reporting_Bugs on how to reach the maintainer.

@menu
* Verbosity::                   
* Isolatin::                    
* Languages::                   
@end menu

@node Verbosity, Isolatin, Invoking LaTeX2RTF, Invoking LaTeX2RTF
@section Verbosity


With the `-v' option you can specify how much of its internal working @l2r{}
is reporting.

If there is a logfile specified the output goes to this file. Nonetheless
Warnings and Errors are logged to stderr always.
(Actually) possible values of `-v' are

@enumerate 0
@item
	  only errors (=`-q').
@item
      Translation Warnings (default).
@item
      does not really do anything at the moment
@item
      Reasonably high level debugging messages
@item
      Show all function calls
@item
	  Show all each character as it is processed
@item
	  Show processing of characters as they are output as well
@end enumerate

@node Isolatin, Languages, Verbosity, Invoking LaTeX2RTF
@section Isolatin

It is not necesary to specify the -l option if you use \usepackage@{isolatin1@}
or \documentstyle[isolatin1]@{...@}. @l2r{} automagically detects this
packages/style options and switches to processing of ISO-Latin1 codes.

@node Languages,  , Isolatin, Invoking LaTeX2RTF
@section Languages

Do not append the @file{.cfg} suffix to the idiom parameter to -i switch. If you
specify an idiom that does not exist in the search path for configuration files
as described above the program aborts.

In the actual version there are four language files delivered: english, french,
german, spanish. If you specify \usepackage or a documentstyle option with one
of these idioms @l2r{} automagically loads the correct language file and you
can omit the -l switch.

@xref{Language Configuration}, for details on how to write a @file{language.cfg} file
for your language by yourself.

@node Features, Configuring LaTeX2RTF , Invoking LaTeX2RTF, Top
@chapter Features


In this chapter you find what styles is @l2r{} supposed to translate
correctly to RTF.


@menu
* Support for the Hyperlatex Style::  
* LaTeX2e::                     
* Character encoding::          
* Cross References::            
* Pagestyles::                  
* Internationalization::        
@end menu

@node  Support for the Hyperlatex Style, LaTeX2e, Features, Features
@section Support for the Hyperlatex Style

Otfried Schwarzkopf has created the ``Hyperlatex Markup Language'' which is a
``little package that allows you to use @latex{} to prepare documents in HTML.''
It brings an Emacs lisp program with it to convert the Hyperlatex file to HTML.
Hyperlatex can be obtained from the CTAN-sites, see section Availability.
There are two handsome commands that avoid typing: \link and \xlink that
generate an ``internal'' label which then is used in the following \Ref and
\Pageref commands.

@latex{} makes it possible to write `\link@{anchor@}[ltx]@{label@}', which typesets:
`anchor ltx'. @l2r{} does NOT support this aproach since the optional
parameter is thrown away right now, @xref{LaTeX2RTF under Development}.

Note that you have to update your @file{.cfg} files if you are upgrading, since
there are a lot of HTML oriented commands in Hyperlatex that we simply can
`ignore'.

@node LaTeX2e, Character encoding, Support for the Hyperlatex Style, Features
@section LaTeX2e

@l2r{} understands \documentclass@{...@} and \usepackage@{...@}, but the
optional parameter of the latter is thrown away. See See section Known_Bugs.

@node Character encoding, Cross References, LaTeX2e, Features
@section Character encoding

If using the -l command line option or the isolatin1 package or style,
@l2r{} automagically interprets the contents of the input file as ISO_8859_1
encoded and generates the corresponding RTF tokens on output.
In some situations this conversion does not take place, or is faulty. See See
section Known_Bugs.

If you have another package that provides support for this or another codepage
please notify us (section Reporting_Bugs), to include support for it.

@node Cross References, Pagestyles, Character encoding, Features
@section Cross References

If RTF version 1.1 is chosen  \label, \ref, and \pageref commands from @latex{} are translated to
hidden text in the RTF file.  (@xref{Missing and faulty command line options}.) This makes it possible to correctly edit the
resulting file in the target word processor. If RTF version 1.4 (or higher) is
chosen, crossreference updating is automated by the RTF reader.

@node Pagestyles, Internationalization, Cross References, Features
@section Pagestyles

If there is no \pagestyle command, the RTF output is generated as with plain
pagestyle, i.e. each page get's its page number centered at the bottom.

You must turn this off with the \pagestyle@{empty@} command in the @latex{} file if
you don't want pagenumbers.
The headings and myheadings styles are silently ignored by now.
The twosided option to the \documentstyle or \documentclass produces the
corresponding RTF tokens.
Note that these features require RTF Version 1.4.

@node Internationalization,  , Pagestyles, Features
@section Internationalization

@l2r{} translates automatically the sectioning titles for `Part',
`References', `Bibliography' and `Abstract' if it encounters a `german' or
`spanish' package or documentstyle option.

The other fixed sectioning titles (``Table of Contents'' and the like) are not
yet needed, because @l2r{} does not handle these @latex{} features.

@xref{Missing and faulty command line options}, for information on
other languages.

Encountering the `german' package or documentstyle option (by H.Partl of the
Viena University) makes @l2r{} behave like that: German Quotes, German
Umlauts by `"a', etc. ...

@node Configuring LaTeX2RTF , Error Messages and Logging of LaTeX2RTF Activity , Features, Top
@chapter Configuring LaTeX2RTF 

@menu
* Input_processing ::           
* Output_formatting ::          
* Direct Conversion Configuration ::               
* Ignore Command Configuration ::               
* Font Configuration ::                
* Language Configuration ::             
@end menu

@node Input_processing , Output_formatting , Configuring LaTeX2RTF , Configuring LaTeX2RTF
@section Input_processing 

On processing input @l2r{} first converts the @latex{} special characters. If
it encounters one of the standard commands it is converted internally. If a
command is not known to @l2r{} it is first looked up in the section
@file{direct.cfg} and the RTF code specified there is output. If not found there it
is looked up in the section @file{ignore.cfg}, since there are a lot of @latex{}
commands that do not show up in the .dvi output (cross reference information
and the like), or that we are not able or willing to convert to rtf.

You can use @file{ignore.cfg} if you get bored to see ``WARNING: command: foo not
found - ignored'' and you don't need `foo' in your Word(R) document, but it
would be nice to send me the offending command to include it in the
distributions configuration files.

@l2r{} accepts Unix-like, MSDOS and Macintosh line ending codes (\n, \r\n
and \r).

Optionally the input is interpreted as iso-latin1 encoded, section Character
encoding.

@node Output_formatting , Direct Conversion Configuration , Input_processing , Configuring LaTeX2RTF
@section Output_formatting 

Since the RTF-Readers normally have their own mood of typesetting and font
handling we have to convert the @latex{} fonts to RTF fontnames.   @xref{Font Configuration}.

If you have information about adequate font mappings from Metafont to TrueType
fonts please send me a note, so I can improve the resemblence beetween @latex{}
and RTF output. I would be happy to include a font resource list in this
manual.

Nevertheless you are free to make all fancy things you like, map \rm on
WingDings if you feel somewhat strange today...

The standard @latex{} styles have some fixed Title names like `Part', `Reference'
or `Bibliography' that appeared in English or German in the output with the
original versions of @l2r{}.

Now you can determine what should appear at this places with an appropriate
section @file{language.cfg} file.
Actually I grep-ed the descriptions out of the `babel' files from teTeX to
supply english, german and spanish translations.

On writing output, @l2r{} generates \n (lf, Newline) as line ending code.
Your RTF-Reader should accept this on any platform. If you ftp your RTf-file
from or to MSDOS platforms the line ending code can be converted to \r\n. As
this should also be legal to any RTf-Reader the resulting RTF-rendering should
not be affected.

@node Direct Conversion Configuration , Ignore Command Configuration , Output_formatting , Configuring LaTeX2RTF
@section Direct Conversion Configuration 

The file @file{direct.cfg} is used for converting @latex{} commands by simple text
replacement. The format consists of lines with a @latex{} command with backslash
followed by comma. The rest of the line until a '.' character will be written
to the RTF file when the command is recognized in the @latex{} file. Lines
starting with a '#' character are ignored. After the '.' everything is ignored
to end of line. To select a specific font use *fontname*. Make sure that the
font name fontname is listed in the fonts configuration file at least as dummy.

To write the '*' character use ``**''. example:
`\alpha,@{\f*Symbol* a@}. #alpha under Windows Symbol Font'
`\copyright,@{\ansi\'a9\pc@}.'

@node Ignore Command Configuration , Font Configuration , Direct Conversion Configuration , Configuring LaTeX2RTF
@section Ignore Command Configuration 

The file @file{ignore.cfg} is used for defining how to ignore certain commands. This
file is used for recognition of @latex{}-variables, user defined variables, and
some simple commands. All variables are ignored but the converter must know the
names to correctly ignore assignments to variables. Lines in this file consist
of a variable-name with backslash, followed by comma and the type of the
variable followed by '.'. Possible Types are:

@table @samp
@item  NUMBER
       simple numeric value
@item  MEASURE
       numeric value with following unit of measure
@item OTHER
       ignores anything to the first character after '=' and from there to next
      space. e.g., @code{\setbox\bak=\hbox}
@item COMMAND
       ignores anything to next '\' and from there to the occurence of anything
      but a letter e.g., @code{\newbox\bak}
@item  SINGLE
       ignore single command e.g., @code{\noindent}
@item  PARAMETER
       ignores a command with one parameter e.g., @code{\foo@{bar@}}
@item PACKAGE
       does not produce a Warning message if PACKAGE is encountered, e.g.,
      `PACKAGE,kleenex.'
@item ENVCMD
       proceses contents of unknown environment as if it were plain @latex{} eg.
      `ENVCMD,environ.' Therefore @code{\begin@{environ@} text \end@{environ@}}' as
      `text'.
@item ENVIRONMENT
       ignores contents of that environment, e.g., with `ENVIRONMENT,ifhtml.'
      @code{\begin@{ifhtml@} text \end@{ifhtml@}} ignores `text'.
@end table

The types are in upper case exactly as above. Do not use spaces. Lines starting
with a '#' character are ignored. After the '.' everything is ignored to end of
line. Example:
@example
\pagelength,MEASURE.'
@end example

@node Font Configuration , Language Configuration , Ignore Command Configuration , Configuring LaTeX2RTF
@section Font Configuration 

The file @file{fonts.cfg} contains the fonts conversion table. A line consists of a
font name in @latex{} followed by comma and a font name in RTF. The end is marked
by a '.'. No spaces are allowed. The @latex{} font will be converted to the RTF
font if encountered in the @latex{} file. If multi- ple translations for a @latex{}
font are specified, only the first is used. All fonts in a @latex{} file that are
not in this file will be mapped to the default font. All RTF fonts listed in
this file will be in every RTF file header whether used or not. Lines starting
with a '#' character are ignored. After the '.' everything is ignored to end of
line. To add a RTF font not used as substitute for a @latex{} font - for example a
Symbol font used in @file{direct.cfg} --- use a dummy @latex{} name like in the following
example:
`Dummy3,MathematicalSymbols.'

Make sure you use the correct font name. Take care of spaces in font names. The
default fonts are named Roman (command \rm), Slanted (command \sl), Sans Serif
(command \sf), Typewriter (command \tt).

@node Language Configuration ,  , Font Configuration , Configuring LaTeX2RTF
@section Language Configuration 

The file(s) @file{language.cfg} control the traduction of @latex{}'s ``hardcoded''
sectioning names.

I have put in what I found whith grep ``\renewcommand'' * in the @latex{} style
directory (teTex, babel), the tokens have the ``name'' stripped of and are all
uppercase i.e. `\contentsname' mutes to `CONTENTS'. Actually @l2r{} uses
only REF and PART.
  CONTENTS
       Contents.
  LISTFIGURE
       List of Figures.
  LISTTABLE
       List of Tables.
  REF
       Bibliography.
  REFARTICLE
       Reference (Bibliography in the article style).
  INDEX
       Index.
  FIGURE
       Figure.
  TABLE
       Table.
  PART
       Part.
  APPENDIX
       Appendix.
  ABSTRACT
       Abstract.

Actually there is an english, a french, a german and a spanish Version. You are
welcome contribute with @file{language.cfg} files in other idioms to include them in
the distribution. Send them to @email{Jorge.Lehner@@gmx.net} or @email{W.Hennings@@fz-juelich.de}.

@node Error Messages and Logging of LaTeX2RTF Activity ,  , Configuring LaTeX2RTF , Top
@chapter Error Messages and Logging of LaTeX2RTF Activity 

Note: Error reporting and logging is one of the most chaotic aspects of the
program. There are a lot of inconsistencies, but I hope to get it cleaner with
time.

As stated in section Verbosity @l2r{} provides a means to control the amount
of information it put's out on stderr.
  Fatal error messages
      indicate a bug in the source code. PLEASE report them, if they do not
      apear in the documentation, see section Reporting_Bugs. Note: By now you
      won't be informed by the program if an error is fatal or not. Try to find
      it out by context ...
  Error messages
      always abort the program. They are thrown on conditions that do not allow
      further converting of the input file, but should be either documented as
      missing or unimplemented feature, or should be able to be corrected by
      the user (e.g. missing @file{.cfg} files).
  Warning messages
      inform you, that there is some conversion loss from @latex{} to RTF, or that
      the output file has some restrictions on some RTF Readers.

Error and Warning messages should follow the GNU Coding standards, i.e. they
have the format:
``inputfile':line: Error|Warning: message'

Note: Neither the inputfile may be correctly announced if @code{\input}ing it, nor
can you rely on the linenumber, see section Known_Bugs.

The other messages only indicate `filename' (sometimes wrong) and linenumber
(also sometimes wrong) and some more or less usefull or interesting message.

Don't try to encounter any sense in debugging levels above 3, these are for my
own delight only and can change significantly between versions.

@node LaTeX2RTF under Development ,  ,  , Top
@chapter LaTeX2RTF under Development 

@menu
* Unimplemented Features ::     
* Missing and faulty command line options ::  
* Known Bugs ::                 
* Reporting Bugs ::             
* Todo List ::                  
@end menu

@node Unimplemented Features, Missing and faulty command line options , LaTeX2RTF under Development , LaTeX2RTF under Development
@section Unimplemented Features 

@itemize @bullet
@item @latex{} passes the optional parameters of \\documentstyle on to \\usepackage,
      @l2r{} doesn't do this. @l2r{}@{@} now accepts optional arguments to
      \\usepackage, but only uses them if they contain latin1
@item Add more input encoding features (other isolatin1 aproaches, other
      codepages,...).
@item Add the code to produce the corresponding chapter, section informations
      and page numbering with headings and myheadings pagestyles. Implement
		  @code{\markboth} and @code{\markright}.
@item To include the tableofcontents there would be two approaches: Transfer
      sectioning information, title text and let produce pagenumber by the rtf-
      reader. Scan and label all of the sectioning commands while reading and
      then construct the sectioning information using these labels. Needs two
      passes on @latex{} input.
@item Separate the Scope of the Document Environment from the Preample
      Environment.
@item Rewrite the parser to allow some kind of macro expansion hence more
      flexibility in configuration and extension.
@item newcounter, newenvironment, newcommand, ...
@item Include the GNU gettext package to internationalize @l2r{}'s Messages.
@item Switch over to GNU getopt() and long options.
@end itemize

Here comes a list of @latex{}-commands that are not implemented:
`setlength, bigcap, dag, ddag, sharp, clubsuit, sim, nobreak, vspace, today,
left-((, right-))'

@node Missing and faulty command line options, Known Bugs, Unimplemented Features , LaTeX2RTF under Development
@section Missing and faulty command line options 

In this section you find comments about missing and buggy command line options.
  `-V'
       The Version information output is not compatible with the GNU Coding
      Standards.

  `-d'
       Information logging and Error reporting is not implemented consistently.
      So do expect confusing Messages and inconsistent format. The linenumber
      and filename of the offending spot in the input in the most cases is not
      correctly determined.
  `'
       There should be an option to intersperse RTF-Output with the @latex{}-input
      that produced it to have a better hand for debugging.
      
  `-o'
       Actually you must specify an output filename. Maybe further on the
      meaning of this option changes, as writing `-o filename' takes more
      typework then `> filename'. Either you may specify the name, or you must
      not do it, depending on whether we choose to use GNU getopt or not.

  `-q'
       There should be a `-q' (quiet) option, to suppress Warning Messages. By
      now this can be achieved by the -d0 option.
      
  `-rmajor.minor'
       There should be an option that restrict the generation of RTF code with
      version greater than major,minor. Actually this is done at compile time.
      There are some Warning messages if ``newer'' RTF Code is generated, but it
      is not consistent at all.
      
  `-h'
       The default values for search pathes and switches changeable by
      commandlineoptions should be shown.

There is a need for a `--language' option (`-l' is yet used, and could be
changed to -e # (--encoding). `-i' as for `--international' is chosen meanwhile
so that the user can select an alternate language file, see section Output
formatting.

It would be useful to implement the GNU long option names, e.g.: `--verbosity',
`--output_file', `--quiet', etc.

@node Known Bugs , Reporting Bugs , Missing and faulty command line options , LaTeX2RTF under Development
@section Known Bugs 

@enumerate
@item The first parameter of a \link@{anchor@}[ltx]@{label@} is converted to the
      rtf-output. Label is stored to hyperref for later use, the optional
      parameter is ignored. [ltx] should be processed as Otfried recommends it,
      to use for exclusive @latex{} output.e.g: \link@{readhere@}[~\Ref]@{explaining:
      chapter@}. Since @{explaining:chapter@} is yet read by @latex{} and hyperlatex
      when [...] is evaluated it produces the correct reference. @l2r{} is
      only strolling from left to right through the text and can't remember
      what she will see in the future.
@item The optional argument of \item[...] in the description environment is
      converted to isolatin1 if applicable, but not @latex{} converted. Try `\item
      [Best~Friends]'.
@item The \section* command is accepted, but as I don't know how to produce a
      section without numbering it in rtf it does precisly this: print a
      section number.
@item CmdLabel can generate rtf1.4 Page references and Bookmarks, but Section
      References only with restrictions: The section reference copies the
      information of the `.aux' file to a locked rtf field. The better way
      would be, to include the section text in a bookmark if there is a label
      following, and write the bookmark with the label name, since then Word
      could update the section information.
@item The diagnostics routine does not output the correct (actual)
      inputfilename. (`.aux', `.bbl', @code{\input}).
@item The @@l2r@{@} macro of this document does NOT produce the correct @latex{}-
      Logo. Somebody can send me a correct version, and for @latexe{} also?!
@item To provide the end-of-line-code features a ``cleaned up'' temporary file is
      written and then read in as inputfile. This gets us into other troubles
      with input redirection and @code{\input} or @code{\include}ed @latex{}-files. This
      procedure is meant as a temporary means to provide this functionality and
      will be removed in the future.
@end enumerate

@node Reporting Bugs , Todo List , Known Bugs , LaTeX2RTF under Development
@section Reporting Bugs 

Report bugs to @email{Jorge.Lehner@@gmx.net,Georg Lehner)}. Ralf Schlatterbeck is no
longer the maintainer and will forward all mails refering @l2r{} to me.

Please give the following information and observe the following guidelines when
reporting a bug in the program:

Tell me the version of the program. For the executable you get the version by
specifying the `-V' option to @l2r{}. For the sources the version is the
version number of the file `version.h'.

The Operating System and version number where you are running or trying to
install @l2r{}. Be sure to check the file `Makefile' for settings that may
be specific to your machine, especially for some versions of SunOS there may be
settings which are needed to compile successfully. Do this before writing to
me.

If the program produces wrong output or does not work for you, include a short
@latex{} file along with a description of the problem. Do not send me large @latex{}
or rtf files, I simply do not have the time to wade through large files to
search for a bug! If necessary (i.e., the program produces wrong or invalid
rtf), send the rtf file that is produced along with the @latex{} input file.

Be patient with me. I am maintaining the program in my free time. I did not
write most of the code. Often I do not have the time to answer to your
question. I will, however, try to fix reported bugs in upcoming releases.

@node Todo List ,  , Reporting Bugs , LaTeX2RTF under Development
@section Todo List 

@itemize @bullet
@item  Make this Manual more consistent, the Todo and Known Bug List shorter and
      the Features List longer.
@item  Harmonize all of the error and warning messages.
@item  Put warnings everwhere aplicable about producing RTF 1.4 tokens.
@item  Provide a Testsuite.
@item  Be more specific about implementing on Unix Platforms.
@item  Provide an Error and Warning recovery guide to the user.
@item  Explain details of the MS-DOS executable in a separate chapter.
@item  Add a chapter with lists of all @latex{} commands that convert, and that do
      not convert to RTF, including their status (for future releases, never,
      partially functional, ...).
@item  The following comes from Ralf: 
		@enumerate 
		@item Redesign the input routines to not
      use lseek so that @l2r{} can read from pipes. 
      @item Change the Makefile
      to use default rules for generating .o files. 
      @item Also use generic rules in
      some other places (clean target) 
      @item For ignored commands the number of
      arguments to ignore should also be given 
      @item Environment definition
      produced with @code{\newtheorem} should be supported 
      @item Move version control
      archive (currently RCS) to CVS. 
      @item  Change how the current version is
      computed (currently version.h defines the version of the whole package
      this should change to a CVS (or RCS) version tag from which a version.h
      file should automatically be generated).
      @end enumerate
@end itemize

@node Index of Commandline and Configuration file Options, , , Top
@chapter Index of Commandline and Configuration file Options 

Jump to:  - - - a - c - e - f - i - l - m - n - o - p - r - s - t - v
***** - *****
    * -h
    * -l
    * -o
    * -q
    * -rmajor.minor
    * -v
    * -V
***** a *****
    * ABSTRACT
    * APPENDIX
***** c *****
    * COMMAND
    * CONTENTS
***** e *****
    * ENVCMD
    * ENVIRONMENT
***** f *****
    * FIGURE
***** i *****
    * INDEX
***** l *****
    * LISTFIGURE
    * LISTTABLE
***** m *****
    * MEASURE
***** n *****
    * NUMBER
***** o *****
    * OTHER
***** p *****
    * PACKAGE
    * PARAMETER
    * PART
***** r *****
    * REF
    * REFARTICLE
***** s *****
    * SINGLE
***** t *****
    * TABLE
***** v *****
    * Verbosity levels

@printindex cp

@contents
@bye


